In this article, we build on and extend research mto the cogmtions and values of users and
designers by proposing a systematic approach for examining the underlying assumptions,
expectations, and knowledge that people have about technology. Such interpretations of technol-
ogy (which we call technological frames) are central to understanding technological development,
use, and change in organizations. We suggest that where the technolo~cal frames of key groups
in organizations-such as managers, technologists, and users—are significantly different, diffi-
culties and conflict around the development, use, and change of technology may result. We use
the findings of an empirical study to Illustrate how the nature, value, and use of a groupware
technology were mterpreted by various orgamzatlonal stakeholders, resulting in outcomes that
deviated from those expected We argue that technological frames offer an interesting and useful
analyhc perspective for explaining and anticipating actions and meanmgs that are not easily
obtained with other theoretical lenses.

Some fifteen years ago Bostrom and Heinen [1977] suggested that many of
the social problems associated with the implementation of information sys-
tems (1S) were due to the frames of reference held by system designers.

Building on this work, Dagwell and Weber [1983] and Kumar and Bjgrn-
Andersen [1990] examined the influence of designers’ values and the views of
users on systems development, while Boland [1978; 1979] showed that the
conceptual framework of the designer influenced the kind of system designed.
Ginzberg [1981], in turn, investigated how users’ expectations of a pending
information system significantly shaped their attitudes toward it. Since these
studies, researchers have considered the perceptions and values of designers
and users as part of their investigations into the social aspects of information
technology [Hirschheim and Klein 1989; Kling and Iacono 1989; Markus
1984].
While a cognitive thread has clearly run through IS research, this has not
led to a systematic articulation of the role of frames of reference in systems
development and use. In this article we hope to lay the groundwork for such a
socio-cognitive approach toward information technology. We argue that an
understanding of people’s interpretations of a technology is critical to under-
standing their interaction with it. To interact with technology, people have to
make sense of it; and in this sense-making process, they develop particular
assumptions, expectations, and knowledge of the technology, which then
serve to shape subsequent actions toward it. While these interpretations
become taken-for-granted and are rarely brought to the surface and reflected
on, they nevertheless remain significant in influencing how actors in organi-
zations think about and act toward technology. Weick [1990, p. 17], for
example, has noted that: “cognition and micro-level processes are keys to
understanding the organizational impact of new technologies.”
We argue that by examining these taken-for-granted notions, we can gain
much insight into how technologies are developed, used, and changed. We
propose a conceptual framework for examining the interpretations that peo-
ple develop around technology, which should be useful for researchers study-
ing the role of technology in organizations, as well as for practitioners
managing the implementation of technological change.
In the next section, we discuss social cognitive research on frames of
reference or cognitive structures that are shared among groups of individuals.
We build on this work to develop the concept of technological frames, which
focuses on those aspects of shared cognitive structures that concern technol-
ogy. We suggest that different groups within an organization may have
different technological frames, and introduce the notion of congruence to
describe the nature and extent of differences among frames. We then draw on
some findings from a field study that analyzed the implementation and early
use of a new information technology to examine key actors’ interpretations of
the technology. The findings reveal significant differences in the technological
frames of two primary groups—technologists and users. The incongruence in
frames provides an interesting explanation of the difficulties and unantici-
pated outcomes associated with the technology implementation. We conclude
by discussing the power of the technological frames concept in research and
practice.

THE CONCEPT OF FRAMES
A major premise of social cognitive research is that people act on the basis of
their interpretations of the world, and in doing so enact particular social
realities and endow them with meaning [Berger and Luckmann 1967; Smir-
cich and Stubbart 1985; Weick 1979a]. The frames of reference held by
organizational members are implicit guidelines that serve to organize and
shape their interpretations of events and organizational phenomena and give
these meaning [Moth and Bartunek 1990; Weick 1979bl. Borrowing the
concept of “schema” from cognitive psychology [Bartlett 1932; Neisser, 1976],
an individual’s frame of reference has been described as “a built-up repertoire
of tacit knowledge that is used to impose structure upon, and impart meaning
to, otherwise ambiguous social and situational information to facilitate un-
derstanding” [Gioia, 1986, p. 56]. Recent literature in organizational behavior
has extended the idea of individual cognitive structures to groups and
organizations [Calder and Schurr 1981; Gray et al. 1985]. A variety of terms
has been used to convey the idea of shared cognitive structures, including
“cognitive maps” [Bougon et al. 1977; Eden 1992], “frames” [Goffman 1974],
“interpretive frames” [Bartunek and Moth 1987], “interpretative schemes”
[Giddens 1984], “mental models” [Argyris and Schon 1978; Shutz 1970],
“paradigms” [Kuhn 1970; Sheldon 1980], “scripts” [Abelson 1981; Gioia 1986],
and “thought worlds” [Douglas 1987; Dougherty 1992].1
While some of these terms (e.g., mental model, frame, and script) have been
used in cognitive science and artificial intelligence, here they reflect our
interest in how organizational members make sense of and assign meaning to
their environment, organization, and tasks (e.g., Daft and Weick, [1984],
Dutton and Jackson [1987], Kiesler and Sproull [1982], and Porac and
Thomas [1990]). Frames refer to “definitions of organizational reality that
serve as vehicles for understanding and action” [Gioia 1986, p. 50]. They
include assumptions, knowledge, and expectations, expressed symbolically
through language, visual images, metaphors, and stories. Frames are flexible
in structure and content, having variable dimensions that shift in salience
and content by context and over time. They are structured more as webs of
meanings than as linear, ordered graphs [Gioia 1986].
By shaping individuals’ interpretations of organizational phenomena,
frames implicitly guide them to make sense of and take action in organiza-
tions [Bartunek 1984; Mc,c5 and Bartunek 1990]. Frames typically operate in
the background and hav : both facilitating and constraining effects. On the
one hand, as Gioia [1986, p. 346] notes, frames are helpful when they
structure organizational experience, allow interpretation of ambiguous situa-
tions, reduce uncertainty in conditiol. c of complexity and change, and provide
a basis for taking action. For example, research paradigms facilitate the
practice of a community of scholars by providing shared assumptions about
the nature of phenomena, a vocabulary for representing such phenomena,
and criteria for evaluating scholarly work. On the other hand, frames are
constraining when they reinforce unreflective reliance on established as-
sumptions and knowledge, distort information to make it fit existing cogni-
tive structures, and inhibit creative problem solving. For example, Starbuck
[1989] shows how the executives of the Facit AB calculator company were so
convinced of the superiority of their mechanical calculators, that they could
not acknowledge the real threat posed by new electronic calculators until
their company was on the brink of failure. As Bolman and Deal [1991, p. 4]
point out, frames can create “psychic prisons” that inhibit learning because
people “cannot look at old problems in a new light and attack old challenges
with different and more powerful tools—they cannot reframe.”

Sharing of Frames
The social cognitive perspective suggests that while members of a particular
community have individual interpretations, they also have a set of core
beliefs in common [Porac et al. 1989]. Professional and occupational training
and socialization may be seen as an attempt by members of a community to
instill the use of particular cognitive schemas in others, especially in new
members [Van Maanen and Schein 1979]. The socio-cognitive literature
acknowledges the strong effect of group or departmental membership, which
influences the particular systems of knowledge, meaning, and norms to which
members are exposed, and creates differences in interests and orientations
among communities [Dougherty 1992; Gregory 1983; Shibutani 1962; Van
Maanen and Schein 1979]. The research on social information processing
[Salancik and Pfeffer 1978], power [Pettigrew 1973; Pfeffer 1980], specializa-
tion [Burns and Stalker 1961; Daft and Lengel 1986; Lawrence and Lorsch
1967], and organizational cultures [Gregory 1983; Riley 1983; Pettigrew
1979, Schein 1985; Strauss 1978] further suggests that people tend to share
assumptions, knowledge, and expectations with others with whom they have
close working relationships. Likewise, social interaction and negotiation over
time create opportunities for the development and exchange of similar points
of view [Gray et al. 1985; Isabella 1990]

A shared frame can take different forms. For example, Weick and Bougon
[1986, p. 112] suggest three: an assemblage that ties individual frames
together through common dimensions; a composite formed by group members
jointly constructing a common understanding through discussion; and an
average, which represents the intersection of frames held by individuals
comprising the group. Our view of shared frames borrows from Wittgenstein’s
[1953] notion of family resemblances, where individuals can be said to share
a frame if some core cognitive elements (assumptions, knowledge, and expec-
tations) are similar.z Thus, we recognize that while frames are necessarily
individually held, and hence inevitably reflect individual variation, it is
nonetheless useful to distinguish those cognitive elements that—through
socialization, interaction, or negotiation—individuals have in common. It is
these collective cognitive elements that individuals draw on to construct and
reconstruct their social reality.
While the concept of shared frames is closely related to that of subcultures,
it should note be confused with it. Frames are cognitive structures or mental
models that are held by individuals. Frames are assumed to be shared by a
number of individuals when there is a significant overlap of cognitive cate-
gories and content. The concept of subcultures, on the other hand, is not
purely cognitive, but refers to the “living historical product of group problem
solving” [Van Maanen and Barley 1985, p. 33]. Subcultures are posited to be
enacted realities. That is, individuals—drawing on their shared frames—en-
gage in symbolic action and thereby construct a social reality that reflects
their common assumptions, beliefs, and understandings, and that includes
particular rules, rituals, and customary practices. Thus, while subcultures
rely heavily on cognitive elements such as common frames of reference, they
are not equivalent [Geertz 1973; Van Maanen and Barley 1985]. Where
cultural and subcultural analyses provide interpretations of contexts—so-
cially established webs of meaning and actions—frames of reference offer a
crisp and powerful lens for focusing specifically on how people make sense of
particular aspects of the world.

Technological Frames

To the extent that technology constitutes a core element in organizations,
aspects of its members’ organizational frames will concern technology. Most
discussions of social cognition do not specifically address technology per se,
emphasizing instead strategy, innovation, or change management. We think
it is useful, at least analytically, to focus on the particular interpretations
made about technology and its role in organizations. We use the term
technological frame to identify that subset of members’ organizational frames
that concern the assumptions, expectations, and knowledge they use to
understand technology in organizations. This includes not only the nature
and role of the technology itself, but the specific conditions, applications, and
consequences of that technology in particular contexts.
A few researchers have proposed the idea that individuals have assump-
tions about and expectations of technology [Bostrom and Heinen, 1977;
Ginzberg 1981; Goodman et al. 1990], and we want to expand on these ideas,
emphasizing the social nature of technological frames, their specific content,
and implications for technology development, implementation, and use. While
the concept of technological frames is rooted in social cognitive research, we
have also drawn on the sociological literature that examines collective cogni-
tion and social constructions of technology [Bijker 1987; Bijker et al. 1987;
Henderson 1991; Eketnan 1991]. In this literature, technology frames are the
understanding that members of a social group come to have of particular
technological artifacts, and they include not only knowledge about the partic-
ular technology but also local understanding of specific uses in a given
setting. This contextual dimension of frames is one we wish to preserve in our
treatment of technological frames, as it is particularly significant. For example,
Bloomberg [1986] shows how users’ perspective of a technology influ-
enced and shaped the way in which it was embedded into their work process.
As she notes, the meaning of a technology “can only be described and its
significance appreciated in the context of its uses and its users” [Bloomberg
1986, p. 42]. We thus include the contexts of design and use, along with the
artifact itself, as formative aspects of technological frames.
Technological frames have powerful effects in that people’s assumptions,
expectations, and knowledge about the purpose, context, importance, and role
of technology will strongly influence the choices made regarding the design
and use of those technologies [Noble 1986; Orlikowski 1992a; Pinch and
Bijker 1987]. Because technologies are social artifacts, their material form
and function will embody their sponsors’ and developers’ objectives, values,
interests, and knowledge of that technology. For example, views of how work
should be done, what the division of labor should be, how much autonomy
employees should have, and how integrated or decoupled production units
should be are all assumptions that are consciously or implicitly built into
information technology by systems planners and designers [Boland 1979;
Hirschheim and Klein 1989; Orlikowski 1992a]. Time, too, affects interpreta-
tion, both for the organization—where understandings of process and product
technology rapidly congeal after implementation [Tyre and Orlikowski 1994]
—and for society [Winner 1986], where, as Pfaffenberger [1988, p. 16] notes:
“Once created, however, the opportunity for social choice diminishes. An imple-
mented technology carries with it a powerful vision of the society in which it is to
be used, replete with an equally powerful endowment of symbolic meaning and,
sometimes, an obligatory plan for the way people will have to arrange themselves
to use it.”

Congruence of Technological Frames

Pinch and Bijker [1987] argue that because a technological artifact may be
interpreted differently by multiple social groups, they will also construct
different interpretations of it based on their interactions with it. Such inter-
pretations, to varying degrees, are shaped and constrained by various groups’
purpose, context, power, knowledge base, and the artifact itself. For example,
automobile designers have different notions and knowledge of automobiles
than drivers, who in turn have different interpretations than mechanics, and
so on. With respect to information technology in organizations, there are
usually a number of critical social groups-in what Kling and Gerson [1978]
refer to as the social world of computing—whose actions will significantly
influence the process and outcome of technological change. Managers, system
developers, and users, at a minimum, will be key actors, and by dint of their
membership in particular social groups and the different roles and relation-
ships they have with technology, will tend to share their group’s technological
frame.
Such group frames are unlikely to be shared across the different stake-
holder groups [Calder and Schurr 1981; Dornbusch and Scott 1975]. For
example, technologists may be expected to have an engineering perspective of
technology, treating it as a tool to be designed, manipulated, and deployed to

accomplish a particular task [Markus and Bj@rn-Anderson 1987; Orlikowski
1988], In contrast, line managers may have a more strategic understanding of
technology, expecting it to facilitate certain ways of doing business and
providing financial returns, while users may take a more focused or instru-
mental view, expecting immediate, local, and task-specific benefits.
We define the notion of congruence in technological frames as referring to
the alignment of frames on key elements or categories. By congruent, we do
not mean identical, but related in structure (i.e., common categories of
frames) and content (i.e., similar values on the common categories). The
notion is akin to that of cognitive consensuality [Gioia and Sims 1986;
Isabella 1990], which Finney and Mitroff [1986, p. 320] define as “a reason-
able amount of implicit agreement among organization members as to the
appropriate meaning of information or events.” Congruence in technological
frames would imply, for example, similar expectations around the role of
technology in business processes, the nature of technological use, or the type
and frequency of support and maintenance. incongruence implies important
differences in expectations, assumptions, or knowledge about some key as-
pects of the technology. For example, a frame incongruence is apparent when
managers expect a technology to transform the way their company does
business, but users believe the technology is intended to merely speed up and
control their work. Alternatively, incongruence may occur when technologists
have a different understanding of and experience with a particular technol-
o~—say a database system, which they believe is highly malleable and
customizable—to that of users who only experience a single structured
interface, and hence believe the database system is inflexible and standard-
ized.
We expect that where incongruent technological frames exist, organizations
are likely to experience difficulties and conflicts around developing, imple-
menting, and using technologies. For example, one of us observed significant
frame incongruence between some organizational members who were partici-
pating in design sessions which they believed would create some minor
changes to their existing technology and the consultants who understood
their mandate as developing new technology around a reengineered work
process. The result was a serious breakdown in communication, a lack of
participation by users in the design process, and the eventual suspension of
the project. Another example is given by Zuboffs [1988] case studies where
managers were unable to accept information technology that would increase
workers’ autonomy and decision-making authority. The managers’ frames
were so rooted in traditional ideas of managerial authority that they could
not “wrest themselves from deep-seated images of managerial control” [Zuboff
1988, p. 278], hence creating substantial incongruence between managers’
and users’ interpretation of the same technology. Managers would not ac-
knowledge that operators’ jobs had changed significantly as a result of
information technology use, while the operators—experiencing the technolog-
ical change—perceived a fundamental shift in their tasks, norms, and re-
sponsibilities. These frame conflicts soon led to social clashes around worker
grievances and union action.

While we are most interested in the incongruence of frames across groups,
since we believe that different world views are likely to be very important in
influencing social relations, we also note that frames may be internally
inconsistent. That is, while frames are typically self-reinforcing, even to the
point of rejecting knowledge that does not fit their system of meaning
[Dougherty 1992], they may also embody ideas that are ambiguous, obsolete,
incomplete, or incorrect. Such inconsistencies within a group’s frame are
largely implicit, yet they often have important consequences. For example,
group members may believe that a new conferencing technology will increase
their collaboration and productivity within the group, while at the same time
they may not expect personally to have to input substantial amounts of
commentary, expecting everyone else to contribute. In this case, members are
likely to promote group conferencing publicly, but not make any changes in
their individual work habits to facilitate collaborative use of the technology.
In order to explore the concept of technological frames in more detail and
provide a concrete illustration of its application and value, we now present
some findings from an empirical study conducted by one of us. Our main
interest in discussing these findings is to demonstrate the explanatory power
of the technological frames concept, not to discuss the research study in full.3
The study investigated the implementation of a new information technol-
ogy-a groupware system—into one large organization, The research in-
cluded a focus on how different actors in the organization made sense of the
new technology and how and why they interacted with it. Technological
frames of the technologists and users were identified and found to be incon-
gruent in a number of ways. This incongruence led to some incompatible
actions around the technology, which made the groupware implementation
more diff3cult than had been anticipated. Before presenting and discussing
these findings, we first describe the research site and methods used.

IMPLICATIONS OF THE TECHNOLOGICAL FRAMES CONCEPT
In this article we proposed the concept of technological frames and argued
that such a social cognitive perspective on information technology offers a
particularly important approach to examining and explaining the develop-
ment, use, and change of information technology in organizations. We drew
on the findings of a research study to apply the concepts of technological
frames and congruence in order to illustrate their explanatory power. We
were able to explain technology change outcomes by referring to the signifi-
cant differences in the technological frames of key actors. The conceptual
framework developed here has important implications for both research and
practice.

We believe that the concept of technological frames extends earlier work on
cognitive structures by focusing on the increasingly salient organizational 
arena of information technology. While organizational researchers have ex-
amined the role of collective cognitive models in organizational action, few
have studied collective cognition of technology. Drawing on the organiza-
tional and sociological literature, we have defined technological frames as the
core set of assumptions, expectations, and knowledge of technology collec-
tively held by a group or community. While technological frames are individu-
ally held, they are also social phenomena, in that mutual understanding
shared by individuals undergirds enactment of a social reality. In this way,
social cognition connect to institutional analyses, which are concerned with
the shared, taken-for-granted systems of social rules and conventions that
structure social thought and action [DiMaggio and Powell 1991, p. 9]. A focus
on the social nature of technological frames allows us to ask a number of
useful questions about collective interpretations of technology: What frames
do particular groups of individuals share, why, and with what consequences?
How are these shared understandings formed, reinforced, institutionalized,
and changed over time? What is the underlying process of such cognitive
formation, stagnation, and modification? How do shared frames of a group
become embedded in technology design and work routines, and with what
consequences?
We believe that the concept of technological frames is a particularly useful
analytic tool for examining how and why people act around information
technology. In particular, this concept allows us to explain and anticipate
outcomes that are not captured by other perspectives, such as political or
structural contingency models. For example, while a political perspective may
explain particular outcomes that are due to the loss or gain of power by a
group, it cannot explain contradictory outcomes due to different interpreta-
tions of a technology. For example, in the Alpha case users and technologists
conceived of Notes differently. The appropriation of Notes as an individual
productivity tool stemmed from users’ interpretation of Notes as being simi-
lar to other already familiar technologies. Technologists, in contrast, under-
stood Notes as facilitating group interaction; hence they appropriated it as a
group productivity tool. In this case, frames provided a valuable lens through
which to understand the interpretive grounds for human action around
technology. The concept of technological frames thus forms a powerful and
useful complement to other forms of social analyses, such as power, control,
and resource dependency [Gash 1987; Grudin 1988; Kling and Iacono 1984;
Markus 1983]. In an overall investigation of technology implementation and
use in organizations, we believe that both interpretive analysis of technology
frames and institutional analyses of structural, cultural, and political issues
are valuable. For example, the detailed analysis of Alpha [Orlikowski 1992b]
included an examination of the institutional elements (such as reward sys-
tems, career paths, and work processes) that constituted the context within
which Notes was introduced and used.
Examining shared cognition around technology can be a powerful means
of articulating and tracing the influence of information systems in organiza-
tions. To date, it would appear that contributions of cognitive researchers
have been primarily limited to understanding individual cognitive processes

such as learning, problem-solving, and knowledge representation in AI re-
search, and issues concerning human factors such as visual and linguistic
interfaces. Our framework focuses on the influence of shared frames and
suggests a potentially broader role for cognitive research in studying informa-
tion systems. It also allows us to trace the often unacknowledged structural
influences of shared interpretations. Over time, the assumptions and cate-
gories of shared cognitive structures are often externalized and institutional-
ized [Giddens 1984; Hedberg et al. 1976; 1977; March and Simon 1958;
Schein 1985]. Once institutionalized, frames tend to produce cognitive inertia
—a conservatism which may protect the organizational status quo, but which
may also prevent an organization from adapting to a changing environment.
Typically, frames are built into the artifact that technologists design and
construct [Orlikowski 1992a], when, for instance, the assumptions and vocab-
ulary of technologists interpret user requirements and drive the design
process [Boland 1979; Markus and Bj@rn-Andersen 1987]. These artifacts
then’ shape the formation of users’ frames, as they attempt to appropriate
that technology [Orlikowski 1992a]. Users’ frames, in turn, become routinized
and embedded in taken-for-granted mental and behavioral habits. The insti-
tutionalizing influence of shared technological interpretations over time has
largely been unexplored within information systems research. The concept of
technological frames can help us investigate it.
Because the concept of frames is a process rather than a variance theory, it
is particularly valuable in examining the changes associated with imple-
mentation of a new technology over time. 7 Social cognitive research has
recognized that mental models are particularly salient sense-making devices
during processes of organizational change [Bartunek and Moth 1987; Isabella
1990; Starbuck 1989; Van Maanen and Schein 1979]. Likewise, technological
frames may be used to track changes in the meanings people ascribe to
information technology over time, thus providing a way of investigating the
processes and outcomes of organizational change [Gash and Orlikowski 1991].
Building on the work of Greenwood and Hinings [1988], we propose that
technological frames may be used to track both expectations of technological
change and the experience of technological change. Because such an approach
examines change as anticipated, interpreted, and experienced by different
organizational players, both intended and unintended changes can be stud-
ied. Through such a process view of technological implementation and use,
the complexities, subtleties, and dynamics of technological change can be
addressed in a manner not possible with variance theories.
Implications for Future Research
Our research has identified an initial set of domains for technological frames
that can serve as the basis for future work. These domains provide guidelines
for examining and articulating people’s interpretive relations with technology.

Three domains of technological frames—nature of technology, technology
strategy, and technology-in-use-appeared to be relevant in the context of a
consulting firm implementing a groupware technology. While we believe that
these domains are relatively general and likely apply to a diversity of
situations, much will be learned by examining them in other organizational
contexts and with other technologies. We also expect that further empirical
investigations will elaborate the domains of technological frames, adding both
domains that apply to technology in general and those that reflect particular
kinds of technologies and specific institutional contexts.
Research is also needed to identify the means through which frames
around information technology become shared or divergent, and to examine
areas of incongruence among the frames of key and associated actors. For
example, it would be useful to assess how much difference in assumptions,
knowledge, and expectations constitutes frame incongruence, and whether
the notion of incongruence varies by context and time. Research studies
might focus on determining the conditions that lead to increased or decreased
congruence in frames, and on elaborating the different organizational conse-
quences usually associated with varying degrees of frame incongruence.
Assessing and recognizing incongruence may be particularly difficult when
frames differ on only some domains when they include considerable ambigu-
ity and inconsistency, or when they are particularly difficult to articulate.
Additionally, research may examine the degree of tolerance or rigidity of
frames with respect to new and possibly contradictory information, the extent
of commitment by various participants to particular frames, and how frames
reflect or deviate from organizational realities [Schwartz 1990]. The process
view of frames also requires an examination of the conditions under which
frames change. For example, identifying the internal and external triggers
that typically serve as catalysts for frame changes in various situations is an
important area of study, as is determining how effective various triggers are
in accomplishing changes in people’s frames and how these lead to changes in
action [Louis and Sutton 1991].
Assessing incongruence and inconsistency in frames and elicitjng deep-
ly held assumptions, expectations, and knowledge poses a number of me-
thodological challenges. We believe there are a variety of methodological
approaches amenable to the study of technological frames and frame in-
congruence across groups. For example, particular kinds of interviewing
techniques, such as clinical interviewing [Schein 1987], discourse-based inter-
viewing [Odell et al. 1983], and focus groups [Krueger 1988] provide some
guidelines for eliciting assumptions and meanings. Researchers could collect
data by directing within-group focus groups or in-depth interviews that
stimulate discussion specifically around meanings of technology and expecta-
tions around its use. Data gathered at interactions between members of
multiple groups (e.g., managers, users, technologists) such as joint applica-
tion design (JAD) sessions may provide good opportunities for observing
congruence (or its absence) and diagnosing reasons for the apparent discrep-
ancies.

Frames are also revealed through the media of action and language, where
the former may be discerned through observation, and the latter through
analysis of metaphors, imagery, symbols, and narratives. While we focused
primarily on interview data, the analysis of the data was also informed by a
number of visual images that are often difficult to integrate into journal
articles. For example, we had access to training materials such as manuals
and a video, physical data gathered through observing people at work, and
actual usage behavior obtained through accessing the technology available to
the users. Analyzing these visual artifacts can provide important clues as to
people’s implicit understandings, values, and concerns. For example, in re-
sponse to a question about the utility of Notes, a user expressed his view
quite clearly by fetching a cartoon that graphically depicted skepticism about
the value of technology in the workplace.
Another important consideration is determining how best to analyze the
data. We posit that content analysis of qualitative data is a viable method for
“reading between the lines” to assess underlying assumptions and expecta-
tions, much as culture researchers interpret manifest artifacts, symbols, and
stories. Researchers might begin by coding the content of their interviews,
focus group transcriptions, and observations in terms of the three domains
we have proposed here [Eisenhardt 1989]. Such analysis would reveal whether
new categories are needed, and if sufficient evidence for categories is found,
they can be examined for the underlying domain they reflect. Frames may
then be examined for internal consistency (using, where feasible, some form
of reliability statistics), and for congruence across groups (e.g., by clustering
common domains and determining divergence). The coding, categorization,
and interpretation of data by researchers may also be strengthened by being
validated directly with sources. In fact, such an exercise may serve to
facilitate further discussion, reflection, and articulation of assumptions,
meanings, and experiences.

Implications for Practice

Early articulation, reflection, discussion, negotiation, and possibly change of
inconsistencies and incongruence may reduce the likelihood of unintended
misunderstandings and delusions around the implementation and use of a
new information technology. Attempts to bring to the surface the common
assumptions, expectations, and knowledge can be particularly useful before
the design and implementation of a system, to identify where and why key
stakeholders’ frames are incongruent, and where and why particular frames
may be internally inconsistent. We saw from the field study how domains of
people’s frames were both incongruent across two key groups, but were also
internally inconsistent within one of the groups. This inconsistency and
incongruence led to certain action and inaction that hampered the implemen-
tation of a new technology. Early identification of these inconsistencies and
incongruencies may have avoided some of the difficulties experienced during
the implementation.

Our conceptualization of technological frames also provides a means for
influencing groups’ frames as the technology development and implementa-
tion process proceeds. Initial assessment or benchmarking of frames will
indicate the degree to which participants share an understanding of the
organizational changes intended by a new technology. Tracking groups’ frames
over time provides practitioners with insight into the underlying reasons for
different conceptions and actions by key stakeholders. It may also provide
insight into the source of the incongruence and hence the nature of appropri-
ate interventions. Different types of incongruence should likely be treated
differently. That is, distinguishing between incongruence due to political
differences and those due to information deficiencies would allow for develop-
ing specific interventions that dealt with the particular difference at hand.
Specific data about the sources of incongruence or inconsistency around a
technological change may be used to design a number of interventions to
attempt clarification or alignment of people’s understanding, including re-
framing the change effort. For example, Bartunek [1984] notes how a school
principal—realizing the political concerns of the teachers—was able to effec-
tively introduce microcomputers by reframing the desired change as a more
acceptable incremental change to the curriculum (computers as a learning
aid) rather than as the more radical and threatening change initially antici-
pated by the teachers.
Technological frames also have implications for the practice of IS develop-
ment itself. In their design and construction of information systems, technolo-
gists have tended to rely on structured methodologies to elicit information
requirements from managers and users. Traditionally these methodologies
have paid little attention to technologists’ assumptions, expectations, knowl-
edge, and how these may differ from the frames of managers and users for
whom the technology is being built. Some of the techniques of frame articula-
tion and assessment mentioned above might usefully be applied to technolo-
gists, so as to track the degree to which their interpretations of the technol-
ogy and associated organizational changes relate to those of other stakehold-
ers. These techniques would be particularly important in the case of external
systems consultants since they have no common organizational context with
their clients; hence congruence in frames may be even more difficult to
accomplish.

CONCLUSION
In this article we have developed the concept of technological frames and
suggested that people’s technological frames influence their actions toward
technology. We further posited that technological frames are shared by
members of a group having a particular interaction with some technology. We
defined the notion of frame incongruence and suggested that different groups
may have incongruent technological frames, which could lead to difficulties
around technological use and change. Different technological frames imply
different ways of knowing and making sense of technology. As these different
interpretations are typically not articulated or discussed, they may, as we
saw in the case of the Notes implementation, result unintendedly and un-
knowingly in misaligned expectations (such as technologists intending im-
provements in group work while users perceive improvements in individual
productivity), contradictory actions (such as technologists installing and oper-
ating a technology while users wait for training and applications), and
unanticipated organizational consequences (such as resistance, skepticism,
and spotty adoption).
By articulating the interaction between shared interpretations, social ac-
tion, and technological artifacts within an organizational context, technologi-
cal frames offer a number of theoretical and practical contributions. We
believe that the concept of technological frames and the broad domains of
technological frames proposed here are a useful starting point for examining
key actors’ interpretations of technology, and the nature and extent of
differences among them. We also believe that the framework of technological
frames has utility for the diagnosis, explanation, and anticipation of out-
comes around technological change in organizations, and hence may be
particularly useful to implementors and practitioners attempting to manage such change processes.